In this stirring, brilliantly argued book, internationally respected
scientist Carl Sagan shows how scientific thinking is necessary to
safeguard our democratic institutions and our technical civilisation.
From an American president consulting horoscopes to a medieval court
burning nine-year-old 'witches', Sagan shows the hazards of scientific
ignorance. Convincingly debunking alien abduction, mediums, faith-
healing fraud, and other modern-day 'demons', he also refutes the
argument that science destroys spirituality, asks why scientific study is
often stigmatised, and provides a 'baloney detection kit' for thinking
through political, social and other issues.

'This is a stimulating study of science as, at its best, a positively
inspirational answer to the irrational rituals that, at their worst, threaten
the planet. Sagan helps us accept the world as it is, not as a fakeloric
fantasy.' Alan Bold, Glasgow Herald

'A brilliant populariser of astronomy and space science ... Sagan's
writing is as lucid and stylish as ever.' Clivc Cookson, Financial Times

'My candidate for planetary ambassador can be none other than Carl
Sagan himself. He is wise, humane, polymathic, witty, well read, and
incapable of composing a dull sentence.' Richard Dawkins, The Times

'No one lias ever succeeded in conveying the wonder, excitement and
joy of science ;is widely as Carl Sagan and few as well ... His ability to
capture the imagination of millions and to explain difficult concepts in
understandable terms is a magnificent achievement.'
The National Academy of Sciences, on awarding Carl Sagan
its highest honour in 1994

Cover photograph © Telegraph Colour Library




THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD



Carl Sagan is the David Duncan Professor of Astronomy
and Space Sciences and Director of the Laboratory for
Planetary Studies at Cornell University; Distinguished
Visiting Scientist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
California Institute of Technology; and co-founder and
President of The Planetary Society, the largest space-
interest group in the world.

For his work, Dr Sagan has been awarded the NASA
Medals for Exceptional Scientific Achievement and
(twice) for Distinguished Public Service, as well as the
NASA Apollo Achievement Award. Asteroid 2709 Sagan
is named after him.



This is the twenty-ninth book Carl Sagan has authored,
co-authored or edited. Some of his other hooks:

Intelligent Life in the Universe

(with I. S. Shklovskii)

The Dragons of Eden
Broca's Brain
Cosmos
Contact: A Novel
Comet

(with Ann Druyan)

A Path Where No Man Thought:
Nuclear Winter and the End of the Arms Race

(with Richard Tnrco)

Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors:
A Search for Who We Are

(with Ann Druyan)

Pale Blue Dot:
A Vision of the Human Future in Space



The

Demon-Haunted
World

Science as a Candle
in the Dark



Carl Sagan



HEADLINE



Copyright © 1997 Carl Sagan



The right of Carl Sagan to be identified as the Author of
the Work has been asserted by him in accordance with the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

First published in 1996
by HEADLINE BOOK PUBLISHING

First published in this edition in 1997
by HEADLINE BOOK PUBLISHING

10 9 8 7 6 5 4

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,
in any form or by any means without the prior written
permission of the publisher, nor be otherwise circulated
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which
it is published and without a similar condition being
imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

ISBN 0 7472 5156 8

Typeset by
Letterpart Limited, Reigate, Surrey

Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Clays Ltd, St Ives pic

HEADLINE BOOK PUBLISHING
A division of Hodder Headline PLC
338 Euston Road
London NW1 3BH



To Tonio,
My grandson.

I wish you a world
Free of demons
And full of light.



We wait for light, but behold darkness.

Isaiah 59:9



It is better to light one candle than to curse the darkness.

Adage



Contents



Preface: My Teachers 1

1 The Most Precious Thing 6

2 Science and Hope 27

3 The Man in the Moon and the Face on Mars 43

4 Aliens 61

5 Spoofing and Secrecy 77

6 Hallucinations 93

7 The Demon-Haunted World 108

8 On the Distinction between True and False Visions 129

9 Therapy 143

10 The Dragon in My Garage 160

11 The City of Grief 179

12 The Fine Art of Baloney Detection 189

13 Obsessed with Reality 207

14 Antiscience 234

15 Newton's Sleep 253

16 When Scientists Know Sin 267

17 The Marriage of Scepticism and Wonder 277

18 The Wind Makes Dust 290

19 No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 300

20 House on Fire* 318

21 The Path to Freedom* 333

22 Significance Junkies 345

23 Maxwell and The Nerds 355



24 Science and Witchcraft* 377

25 Real Patriots Ask Questions* 396
Acknowledgements 409
References 412
Index 427



* Written with Ann Druyan



Preface
My Teachers



It was a blustery fall day in 1939. In the streets outside the
apartment building, fallen leaves were swirling in little whirl-
winds, each with a life of its own. It was good to be inside and
warm and safe, with my mother preparing dinner in the next
room. In our apartment there were no older kids who picked on
you for no reason. Just the week before, I had been in a fight - I
can't remember, after all these years, who it was with; maybe it
was Snoony Agata from the third floor - and, after a wild swing, I
found I had put my fist through the plate glass window of
Schechter's drug store.

Mr Schechter was solicitous: 'It's all right, I'm insured,' he said
as he put some unbelievably painful antiseptic on my wrist. My
mother took me to the doctor whose office was on the ground
floor of our building. With a pair of tweezers, he pulled out a
fragment of glass. Using needle and thread, he sewed two stitches.

'Two stitches!' my father had repeated later that night. He knew
about stitches, because he was a cutter in the garment industry; his
job was to use a very scary power saw to cut out patterns - backs,
say, or sleeves for ladies' coats and suits - from an enormous stack
of cloth. Then the patterns were conveyed to endless rows of
women sitting at sewing machines. He was pleased I had gotten
angry enough to overcome a natural timidity.

Sometimes it was good to fight back. I hadn't planned to do
anything violent. It just happened. One moment Snoony was



1



THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD



pushing me and the next moment my fist was through Mr
Schechter's window. I had injured my wrist, generated an unex-
pected medical expense, broken a plate glass window, and no one
was mad at me. As for Snoony, he was more friendly than ever.

I puzzled over what the lesson was. But it was much more
pleasant to work it out up here in the warmth of the apartment,
gazing out through the living-room window into Lower New York
Bay, than to risk some new misadventure on the streets below.

As she often did, my mother had changed her clothes and made
up her face in anticipation of my father's arrival. We talked about
my fight with Snoony. The Sun was almost setting and together we
looked out across the choppy waters.

'There are people fighting out there, killing each other,' she
said, waving vaguely across the Atlantic. I peered intently.

'I know,' I replied. 'I can see them.'

'No, you can't,' she replied, sceptically, almost severely, before
returning to the kitchen. 'They're too far away.'

How could she know whether I could see them or not? I
wondered. Squinting, I had thought I'd made out a thin strip of
land at the horizon on which tiny figures were pushing and shoving
and duelling with swords as they did in my comic books. But maybe
she was right. Maybe it had just been my imagination, a little like
the midnight monsters that still, on occasion, awakened me from a
deep sleep, my pyjamas drenched in sweat, my heart pounding.

How can you tell when someone is only imagining? I gazed out
across the grey waters until night fell and I was called to wash my
hands for dinner. When he came home, my father swooped me up
in his arms. I could feel the cold of the outside world against his
one-day growth of beard.

On a Sunday in that same year, my father had patiently explained
to me about zero as a placeholder in arithmetic, about the
wicked-sounding names of big numbers, and about how there's no
biggest number ('You can always add one,' he pointed out).
Suddenly, I was seized by a childish compulsion to write in
sequence all the integers from 1 to 1,000. We had no pads of
paper, but my father offered up the stack of grey cardboards he
had been saving from when his shirts were sent to the laundry. I



2



My Teachers



started the project eagerly, but was surprised at how slowly it
went. When I had gotten no farther than the low hundreds, my
mother announced that it was time for me to take my bath. I was
disconsolate. I had to get a thousand. A mediator his whole life,
my father intervened: if I would cheerfully submit to the bath, he
would continue the sequence. I was overjoyed. By the time I
emerged, he was approaching 900, and I was able to reach 1,000
only a little past my ordinary bedtime. The magnitude of large
numbers has never ceased to impress me.

Also in 1939 my parents took me to the New York World's Fair.
There, I was offered a vision of a perfect future made possible by
science and high technology. A time capsule was buried, packed
with artefacts of our time for the benefit of those in the far future -
who, astonishingly, might not know much about the people of
1939. The 'World of Tomorrow' would be sleek, clean, stream-
lined and, as far as I could tell, without a trace of poor people.

'See sound' one exhibit bewilderingly commanded. And sure
enough, when the tuning fork was struck by the little hammer, a
beautiful sine wave marched across the oscilloscope screen. 'Hear
light' another poster exhorted. And sure enough, when the
flashlight shone on the photocell, I could hear something like the
static on our Motorola radio set when the dial was between
stations. Plainly the world held wonders of a kind I had never
guessed. How could a tone become a picture and light become a
noise?

My parents were not scientists. They knew almost nothing
about science. But in introducing me simultaneously to scepticism
and to wonder, they taught me the two uneasily cohabiting modes
of thought that are central to the scientific method. They were
only one step out of poverty. But when I announced that I wanted
to be an astronomer, I received unqualified support - even if they
(as I) had only the most rudimentary idea of what an astronomer
does. They never suggested that, all things considered, it might be
better to be a doctor or a lawyer.

I wish I could tell you about inspirational teachers in science
from my elementary or junior high or high school days. But as I
think back on it, there were none. There was rote memorization
about the Periodic Table of the Elements, levers and inclined



3



THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD



planes, green plant photosynthesis, and the difference between
anthracite and bituminous coal. But there was no soaring sense of
wonder, no hint of an evolutionary perspective, and nothing about
mistaken ideas that everybody had once believed. In high school
laboratory courses, there was an answer we were supposed to get.
We were marked off if we didn't get it. There was no encourage-
ment to pursue our own interests or hunches or conceptual
mistakes. In the backs of textbooks there was material you could
tell was interesting. The school year would always end before we
got to it. You could find wonderful books on astronomy, say, in
the libraries, but not in the classroom. Long division was taught as
a set of rules from a cookbook, with no explanation of how this
particular sequence of short divisions, multiplications and subtrac-
tions got you the right answer. In high school, extracting square
roots was offered reverentially, as if it were a method once handed
down from Mt Sinai. It was our job merely to remember what we
had been commanded. Get the right answer, and never mind that
you don't understand what you're doing. I had a very capable
second-year algebra teacher from whom I learned much math-
ematics; but he was also a bully who enjoyed reducing young
women to tears. My interest in science was maintained through all
those school years by reading books and magazines on science fact
and fiction.

College was the fulfilment of my dreams: I found teachers who
not only understood science, but who were actually able to explain
it. I was lucky enough to attend one of the great institutions of
learning of the time, the University of Chicago. I was a physics
student in a department orbiting around Enrico Fermi; I discov-
ered what true mathematical elegance is from Subrahmanyan
Chandrasekhar; I was given the chance to talk chemistry with
Harold Urey; over summers I was apprenticed in biology to H.J.
Muller at Indiana University; and I learned planetary astronomy
from its only full-time practitioner at the time, G.P. Kuiper.

It was from Kuiper that I first got a feeling for what is called a
back-of-the-envelope calculation: a possible explanation to a
problem occurs to you, you pull out an old envelope, appeal to
your knowledge of fundamental physics, scribble a few approxi-
mate equations on the envelope, substitute in likely numerical



4



My Teachers



values, and see if your answer comes anywhere near explaining
your problem. If not, you look for a different explanation. It cut
through nonsense like a knife through butter.

At the University of Chicago I also was lucky enough to go
through a general education programme devised by Robert M.
Hutchins, where science was presented as an integral part of the
gorgeous tapestry of human knowledge. It was considered
unthinkable for an aspiring physicist not to know Plato, Aristotle,
Bach, Shakespeare, Gibbon, Malinowski and Freud - among
many others. In an introductory science class, Ptolemy's view that
the Sun revolved around the Earth was presented so compellingly
that some students found themselves re-evaluating their commit-
ment to Copernicus. The status of the teachers in the Hutchins
curriculum had almost nothing to do with their research; per-
versely - unlike the American university standard of today -
teachers were valued for their teaching, their ability to inform and
inspire the next generation.

In this heady atmosphere, I was able to fill in some of the many
gaps in my education. Much that had been deeply mysterious, and
not just in science, became clearer. I also witnessed at first hand
the joy felt by those whose privilege it is to uncover a little about
how the Universe works.

I've always been grateful to my mentors of the 1950s, and tried
to make sure that each of them knew my appreciation. But as I
look back, it seems clear to me that I learned the most essential
things not from my school teachers, nor even from my university
professors, but from my parents, who knew nothing at all about
science, in that single far-off year of 1939.



5



1

The Most Precious Thing



All our science, measured against reality, is primitive and
childlike - and yet it is the most precious thing we have.

Albert Einstein (1879-1955)

As I got off the plane, he was waiting for me, holding up a
scrap of cardboard with my name scribbled on it. I was on
my way to a conference of scientists and TV broadcasters devoted
to the seemingly hopeless prospect of improving the presentation
of science on commercial television. The organizers had kindly
sent a driver.

'Do you mind if I ask you a question?' he said as we waited for
my bag.

No, I didn't mind.

'Isn't it confusing to have the same name as that scientist guy?'
It took me a moment to understand. Was he pulling my leg?
Finally, it dawned on me.

'I am that scientist guy,' I answered.

He paused and then smiled. 'Sorry. That's my problem. I
thought it was yours too.'

He put out his hand. 'My name is William F. Buckley.' (Well,
he wasn't exactly William F. Buckley, but he did bear the name of
a contentious and well-known TV interviewer, for which he
doubtless took a lot of good-natured ribbing.)

As we settled into the car for the long drive, the windshield



6



The Most Precious Thing



wipers rhythmically thwacking, he told me he was glad I was 'that
scientist guy' - he had so many questions to ask about science.
Would I mind?
No, I didn't mind.

And so we got to talking. But not, as it turned out, about
science. He wanted to talk about frozen extraterrestrials languish-
ing in an Air Force base near San Antonio, 'channelling' (a way to
hear what's on the minds of dead people - not much, it turns out),
crystals, the prophecies of Nostradamus, astrology, the shroud of
Turin ... He introduced each portentous subject with buoyant
enthusiasm. Each time I had to disappoint him:

'The evidence is crummy,' I kept saying. 'There's a much
simpler explanation.'

He was, in a way, widely read. He knew the various speculative
nuances on, let's say, the 'sunken continents' of Atlantis and
Lemuria. He had at his fingertips what underwater expeditions
were supposedly just setting out to find the tumbled columns and
broken minarets of a once-great civilization whose remains were
now visited only by deep sea luminescent fish and giant kraken.
Except . . . while the ocean keeps many secrets, I knew that there
isn't a trace of oceanographic or geophysical support for Atlantis
and Lemuria. As far as science can tell, they never existed. By
now a little reluctantly, I told him so.

As we drove through the rain, I could see him getting glummer
and glummer. I was dismissing not just some errant doctrine, but a
precious facet of his inner life.

And yet there's so much in real science that's equally exciting,
more mysterious, a greater intellectual challenge - as well as being
a lot closer to the truth. Did he know about the molecular building
blocks of life sitting out there in the cold, tenuous gas between the
stars? Had he heard of the footprints of our ancestors found in
4-million-year-old volcanic ash? What about the raising of the
Himalayas when India went crashing into Asia? Or how viruses,
built like hypodermic syringes, slip their DNA past the host
organism's defences and subvert the reproductive machinery of
cells; or the radio search for extraterrestrial intelligence; or the
newly discovered ancient civilization of Ebla that advertised the
virtues of Ebla beer? No, he hadn't heard. Nor did he know, even



7



THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD



vaguely, about quantum indeterminacy, and he recognized DNA
only as three frequently linked capital letters.

Mr 'Buckley' - well-spoken, intelligent, curious - had heard
virtually nothing of modern science. He had a natural appetite for
the wonders of the Universe. He wanted to know about science.
It's just that all the science had gotten filtered out before it
reached him. Our cultural motifs, our educational system, our
communications media had failed this man. What society permit-
ted to trickle through was mainly pretence and confusion. It had
never taught him how to distinguish real science from the cheap
imitation. He knew nothing about how science works.

There are hundreds of books about Atlantis - the mythical
continent that is said to have existed something like 10,000 years
ago in the Atlantic Ocean. (Or somewhere. A recent book locates
it in Antarctica.) The story goes back to Plato, who reported it as
hearsay coming down to him from remote ages. Recent books
authoritatively describe the high level of Atlantean technology,
morals and spirituality, and the great tragedy of an entire popu-
lated continent sinking beneath the waves. There is a 'New Age'
Atlantis, 'the legendary civilization of advanced sciences,' chiefly
devoted to the 'science' of crystals. In a trilogy called Crystal
Enlightenment by Katrina Raphaell - the books mainly responsi-
ble for the crystal craze in America - Atlantean crystals read
minds, transmit thoughts, are the repositories of ancient history
and the model and source of the pyramids of Egypt. Nothing
approximating evidence is offered to support these assertions. (A
resurgence of crystal mania may follow the recent finding by the
real science of seismology that the inner core of the Earth may be
composed of a single, huge, nearly perfect crystal - of iron.)

A few books - Dorothy Vitaliano's Legends of the Earth, for
example - sympathetically interpret the original Atlantis legends
in terms of a small island in the Mediterranean that was destroyed
by a volcanic eruption, or an ancient city that slid into the Gulf of
Corinth after an earthquake. This, for all we know, may be the
source of the legend, but it is a far cry from the destruction of a
continent on which had sprung forth a preternaturally advanced
technical and mystical civilization.

What we almost never find - in public libraries or newsstand



8



The Most Precious Thing



magazines or prime-time television programmes - is the evidence
from sea floor spreading and plate tectonics, and from mapping
the ocean floor which shows quite unmistakably that there could
have been no continent between Europe and the Americas on
anything like the timescale proposed.

Spurious accounts that snare, the gullible are readily available.
Sceptical treatments are much harder to find. Scepticism does not
sell well. A bright and curious person who relies entirely on
popular culture to be informed about something like Atlantis is
hundreds or thousands of times more likely to come upon a fable
treated uncritically than a sober and balanced assessment.

Maybe Mr Buckley should know to be more sceptical about
what's dished out to him by popular culture. But apart from that,
it's hard to see how it's his fault. He simply accepted what the
most widely available and accessible sources of information
claimed was true. For his naivete, he was systematically misled
and bamboozled.

Science arouses a soaring sense of wonder. But so does pseudo-
science. Sparse and poor popularizations of science abandon
ecological niches that pseudoscience promptly fills. If it were
widely understood that claims to knowledge require adequate
evidence before they can be accepted, there would be no room for
pseudoscience. But a kind of Gresham's Law prevails in popular
culture by which bad science drives out good.

All over the world there are enormous numbers of smart, even
gifted, people who harbour a passion for science. But that passion
is unrequited. Surveys suggest that some 95 per cent of Americans
are 'scientifically illiterate'. That's just the same fraction as those
African Americans, almost all of them slaves, who were illiterate
just before the Civil War - when severe penalties were in force for
anyone who taught a slave to read. Of course there's a degree of
arbitrariness about any determination of illiteracy, whether it
applies to language or to science. But anything like 95 per cent
illiteracy is extremely serious.

Every generation worries that educational standards are decay-
ing. One of the oldest short essays in human history, dating from
Sumer some 4,000 years ago, laments that the young are disas-
trously more ignorant than the generation immediately preceding.



9



THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD



Twenty-four hundred years ago, the ageing and grumpy Plato, in
Book VII of the Laws, gave his definition of scientific illiteracy:

Who is unable to count one, two, three, or to distinguish odd
from even numbers, or is unable to count at all, or reckon
night and day, and who is totally unacquainted with the
revolution of the Sun and Moon, and the other stars . . . All
freemen, I conceive, should learn as much of these branches
of knowledge as every child in Egypt is taught when he learns
the alphabet. In that country arithmetical games have been
invented for the use of mere children, which they learn as
pleasure and amusement . . . I . . . have late in life heard
with amazement of our ignorance in these matters; to me we
appear to be more like pigs than men, and I am quite
ashamed, not only of myself, but of all Greeks.

I don't know to what extent ignorance of science and mathematics
contributed to the decline of ancient Athens, but I know that the
consequences of scientific illiteracy are far more dangerous in our
time than in any that has come before. It's perilous and foolhardy
for the average citizen to remain ignorant about global warming,
say, or ozone depletion, air pollution, toxic and radioactive
wastes, acid rain, topsoil erosion, tropical deforestation, exponen-
tial population growth. Jobs and wages depend on science and
technology. If our nation can't manufacture, at high quality and
low price, products people want to buy, then industries will
continue to drift away and transfer a little more prosperity to
other parts of the world. Consider the social ramifications of
fission and fusion power, supercomputers, data 'highways', abor-
tion, radon, massive reductions in strategic weapons, addiction,
government eavesdropping on the lives of its citizens, high-
resolution TV, airline and airport safety, foetal tissue transplants,
health costs, food additives, drugs to ameliorate mania or depres-
sion or schizophrenia, animal rights, superconductivity, morning-
after pills, alleged hereditary antisocial predispositions, space
stations, going to Mars, finding cures for AIDS and cancer.

How can we affect national policy - or even make intelligent
decisions in our own lives - if we don't grasp the underlying



10



The Most Precious Thing



issues? As I write, Congress is dissolving its own Office of
Technology Assessment - the only organization specifically tasked
to provide advice to the House and Senate on science and
technology. Its competence and integrity over the years have been
exemplary. Of the 535 members of the US Congress, rarely in the
twentieth century have as many as one per cent had any significant
background in science. The last scientifically literate President
may have been Thomas Jefferson.*

So how do Americans decide these matters? How do they
instruct their representatives? Who in fact makes these decisions,
and on what basis?

Hippocrates of Cos is the father of medicine. He is still remembered
2,500 years later for the Hippocratic Oath (a modified form of which
is still here and there taken by medical students upon their gradua-
tion). But he is chiefly celebrated because of his efforts to bring
medicine out of the pall of superstition and into the light of science.
In a typical passage Hippocrates wrote: 'Men think epilepsy divine,
merely because they do not understand it. But if they called
everything divine which they do not understand, why, there would
be no end of divine things.' Instead of acknowledging that in many
areas we are ignorant, we have tended to say things like the Universe
is permeated with the ineffable. A God of the Gaps is assigned
responsibility for what we do not yet understand. As knowledge of
medicine improved since the fourth century BC, there was more and
more that we understood and less and less that had to be attributed
to divine intervention - either in the causes or in the treatment of
disease. Deaths in childbirth and infant mortality have decreased,
lifetimes have lengthened, and medicine has improved the quality of
life for billions of us all over the planet.

In the diagnosis of disease, Hippocrates introduced elements
of the scientific method. He urged careful and meticulous

* Although claims can be made for Theodore Roosevelt, Herbert Hoover and
Jimmy Carter. Britain had such a Prime Minister in Margaret Thatcher. Her
early studies in chemistry, in part under the tutelage of Nobel laureate Dorothy
Hodgkin, were key to the UK's strong and successful advocacy that ozone-
depleting CFCs be banned worldwide.



11



THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD



observation: 'Leave nothing to chance. Overlook nothing.
Combine contradictory observations. Allow yourself enough
time.' Before the invention of the thermometer, he charted the
temperature curves of many diseases. He recommended that
physicians be able to tell, from present symptoms alone, the
probable past and future course of each illness. He stressed
honesty. He was willing to admit the limitations of the physician's
knowledge. He betrayed no embarrassment in confiding to poster-
ity that more than half his patients were killed by the diseases he
was treating. His options of course were limited; the drugs
available to him were chiefly laxatives, emetics and narcotics.
Surgery was performed, and cauterization. Considerable further
advances were made in classical times through to the fall of Rome.

While medicine in the Islamic world flourished, what followed
in Europe was truly a dark age. Much knowledge of anatomy and
surgery was lost. Reliance on prayer and miraculous healing
abounded. Secular physicians became extinct. Chants, potions,
horoscopes and amulets were widely used. Dissections of cadavers
were restricted or outlawed, so those who practised medicine were
prevented from acquiring first-hand knowledge of the human
body. Medical research came to a standstill.

It was very like what the historian Edward Gibbon described for
the entire Eastern Empire, whose capital was Constantinople:

In the revolution often centuries, not a single discovery was
made to exalt the dignity or promote the happiness of mankind.
Not a single idea had been added to the speculative systems of
antiquity, and a succession of patient disciples became in their
turn the dogmatic teachers of the next servile generation.

Even at its best, pre-modern medical practice did not save many.
Queen Anne was the last Stuart monarch of Great Britain. In the last
seventeen years of the seventeenth century, she was pregnant
eighteen times. Only five children were born alive. Only one of them
survived infancy. He died before reaching adulthood, and before her
coronation in 1702. There seems to be no evidence of some genetic
disorder. She had the best medical care money could buy.

Diseases that once tragically carried off countless infants and



12



The Most Precious Thing



children have been progressively mitigated and cured by science -
through the discovery of the microbial world, via the insight that
physicians and midwives should wash their hands and sterilize
their instruments, through nutrition, public health and sanitation
measures, antibiotics, drugs, vaccines, the uncovering of the
molecular structure of DNA, molecular biology, and now gene
therapy. In the developed world at least, parents today have an
enormously better chance of seeing their children live to adult-
hood than did the heir to the throne of one of the most powerful
nations on Earth in the late seventeenth century. Smallpox has been
wiped out worldwide. The area of our planet infested with malaria-
carrying mosquitoes has dramatically shrunk. The number of years a
child diagnosed with leukaemia can expect to live has been increas-
ing progressively, year by year. Science permits the Earth to feed
about a hundred times more humans, and under conditions much
less grim, than it could a few thousand years ago.

We can pray over the cholera victim, or we can give her 500
milligrams of tetracycline every twelve hours. (There is still a
religion, Christian Science, that denies the germ theory of disease; if
prayer fails, the faithful would rather see their children die than give
them antibiotics.) We can try nearly futile psychoanalytic talk
therapy on the schizophrenic patient, or we can give him 300 to 500
milligrams a day of chlozapine. The scientific treatments are hun-
dreds or thousands of times more effective than the alternatives.
(And even when the alternatives seem to work, we don't actually
know that they played any role: spontaneous remissions, even of
cholera and schizophrenia, can occur without prayer and without
psychoanalysis.) Abandoning science means abandoning much more
than air conditioning, CD players, hair dryers and fast cars.

In hunter-gatherer, pre-agricultural times, the human life
expectancy was about 20 to 30 years. That's also what it was in
Western Europe in Late Roman and in Medieval times. It didn't
rise to 40 years until around the year 1870. It reached 50 in 1915,
60 in 1930, 70 in 1955, and is today approaching 80 (a little more
for women, a little less for men). The rest of the world is retracing
the European increment in longevity. What is the cause of this
stunning, unprecedented, humanitarian transition? The germ
theory of disease, public health measures, medicines and medical



13



THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD



technology. Longevity is perhaps the best single measure of the
physical quality of life. (If you're dead, there's little you can do to
be happy.) This is a precious offering from science to humanity -
nothing less than the gift of life.

But micro-organisms mutate. New diseases spread like wildfire.
There is a constant battle between microbial measures and human
countermeasures. We keep pace in this competition not just by
designing new drugs and treatments, but by penetrating progres-
sively more deeply toward an understanding of the nature of life -
basic research.

If the world is to escape the direst consequences of global
population growth and 10 or 12 billion people on the planet in the
late twenty-first century, we must invent safe but more efficient
means of growing food - with accompanying seed stocks, irrigation,
fertilizers, pesticides, transportation and refrigeration systems. It will
also take widely available and acceptable contraception, significant
steps toward political equality of women, and improvements in the
standards of living of the poorest people. How can all this be
accomplished without science and technology?

I know that science and technology are not just cornucopias
pouring gifts out into the world. Scientists not only conceived
nuclear weapons; they also took political leaders by the lapels,
arguing that their nation - whichever it happened to be - had to
have one first. Then they manufactured over 60,000 of them.
During the Cold War, scientists in the United States, the Soviet
Union, China and other nations were willing to expose their own
fellow citizens to radiation - in most cases without their know-
ledge - to prepare for nuclear war. Physicians in Tuskegee,
Alabama, misled a group of veterans into thinking they were
receiving medical treatment for their syphilis, when they were the
untreated controls. The atrocious cruelties of Nazi doctors are
well-known. Our technology has produced thalidomide, CFCs,
Agent Orange, nerve gas, pollution of air and water, species
extinctions, and industries so powerful they can ruin the climate of
the planet. Roughly half the scientists on Earth work at least
part-time for the military. While a few scientists are still perceived
as outsiders, courageously criticizing the ills of society and provid-
ing early warnings of potential technological catastrophes, many



14



The Most Precious Thing



are seen as compliant opportunists, or as the willing source of
corporate profits and weapons of mass destruction - never mind
the long-term consequences. The technological perils that science
serves up, its implicit challenge to received wisdom, and its
perceived difficulty, are all reasons for some people to mistrust
and avoid it. There's a reason people are nervous about science
and technology. And so the image of the mad scientist haunts our
world - down to the white-coated loonies of Saturday morning
children's TV and the plethora of Faustian bargains in popular
culture, from the eponymous Dr Faustus himself to Dr Franken-
stein, Dr Strangelove, and Jurassic Park.

But we can't simply conclude that science puts too much power
into the hands of morally feeble technologists or corrupt, power-
crazed politicians and so decide to get rid of it. Advances in
medicine and agriculture have saved vastly more lives than have
been lost in all the wars in history.* Advances in transportation,
communication and entertainment have transformed and unified
the world. In opinion poll after opinion poll science is rated
among the most admired and trusted occupations, despite the
misgivings. The sword of science is double-edged. Its awesome
power forces on all of us, including politicians, a new responsibil-
ity - more attention to the long-term consequences of technology,
a global and transgenerational perspective, an incentive to avoid
easy appeals to nationalism and chauvinism. Mistakes are becoming
too expensive.

Do we care what's true? Does it matter?

. . . where ignorance is bliss,
'Tis folly to be wise

wrote the poet Thomas Gray. But is it? Edmund Way Teale in his
1950 book Circle of the Seasons understood the dilemma better:

* At a large dinner party recently, I asked the assembled guests - ranging in age,
I guess, from thirties to sixties - how many of them would be alive today if not
for antibiotics, cardiac pacemakers, and the rest of the panoply of modern
medicine. Only one hand went up. It was not mine.



15



THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD



It is morally as bad not to care whether a thing is true or not,
so long as it makes you feel good, as it is not to care how you
got your money as long as you have got it.

It's disheartening to discover government corruption and incom-
petence, for example; but it is better not to know about it? Whose
interest does ignorance serve? If we humans bear, say, hereditary
propensities toward the hatred of strangers, isn't self-knowledge
the only antidote? If we long to believe that the stars rise and set
for us, that we are the reason there is a Universe, does science do
us a disservice in deflating our conceits?

In The Genealogy of Morals, Friedrich Nietzsche, as so many
before and after, decries the 'unbroken progress in the self-
belittling of man' brought about by the scientific revolution.
Nietzsche mourns the loss of 'man's belief in his dignity, his
uniqueness, his irreplaceability in the scheme of existence'. For
me, it is far better to grasp the Universe as it really is than to
persist in delusion, however satisfying and reassuring. Which
attitude is better geared for our long-term survival? Which gives
us more leverage on our future? And if our naive self-confidence
is a little undermined in the process, is that altogether such a loss?
Is there not cause to welcome it as a maturing and character-
building experience?

To discover that the Universe is some 8 to 15 billion and not 6 to
12 thousand years old* improves our appreciation of its sweep and
grandeur; to entertain the notion that we are a particularly
complex arrangement of atoms, and not some breath of divinity,
at the very least enhances our respect for atoms; to discover, as
now seems probable, that our planet is one of billions of other
worlds in the Milky Way galaxy and that our galaxy is one of
billions more, majestically expands the arena of what is possible;

* 'No thinking religious person believes this. Old hat,' writes one of the referees
of this book. But many 'scientific creationists' not only believe it, but are
making increasingly aggressive and successful efforts to have it taught in the
schools, museums, zoos, and textbooks. Why? Because adding up the 'begats',
the ages of patriarchs and others in the Bible gives such a figure, and the Bible
is 'inerrant'.



16



The Most Precious Thing



to find that our ancestors were also the ancestors of apes ties us to
the rest of life and makes possible important - if occasionally
rueful - reflections on human nature.

Plainly there is no way back. Like it or not, we are stuck with
science. We had better make the best of it. When we finally come
to terms with it and fully recognize its beauty and its power, we
will find, in spiritual as well as in practical matters, that we have
made a bargain strongly in our favour.

But superstition and pseudoscience keep getting in the way,
distracting all the 'Buckleys' among us, providing easy answers,
dodging sceptical scrutiny, casually pressing our awe buttons and
cheapening the experience, making us routine and comfortable
practitioners as well as victims of credulity. Yes, the world would
be a more interesting place if there were UFOs lurking in the deep
waters off Bermuda and eating ships and planes, or if dead people
could take control of our hands and write us messages. It would be
fascinating if adolescents were able to make telephone handsets
rocket off their cradles just by thinking at them, or if our dreams
could, more often than can be explained by chance and our
knowledge of the world, accurately foretell the future.

These are all instances of pseudoscience. They purport to use
the methods and findings of science, while in fact they are faithless
to its nature - often because they are based on insufficient
evidence or because they ignore clues that point the other way.
They ripple with gullibility. With the uninformed cooperation
(and often the cynical connivance) of newspapers, magazines,
book publishers, radio, television, movie producers and the like,
such ideas are easily and widely available. Far more difficult to
come upon, as I was reminded by my encounter with Mr 'Buckley',
are the alternative, more challenging and even more dazzling
findings of science.

Pseudoscience is easier to contrive than science, because dis-
tracting confrontations with reality - where we cannot control the
outcome of the comparison - are more readily avoided. The
standards of argument, what passes for evidence, are much more
relaxed. In part for these same reasons, it is much easier to
present pseudoscience to the general public than science. But this
isn't enough to explain its popularity.



17



THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD



Naturally people try various belief systems on for size, to see if
they help. And if we're desperate enough, we become all too
willing to abandon what may be perceived as the heavy burden of
scepticism. Pseudoscience speaks to powerful emotional needs
that science often leaves unfulfilled. It caters to fantasies about
personal powers we lack and long for (like those attributed to
comic book superheroes today, and earlier, to the gods). In some
of its manifestations, it offers satisfaction of spiritual hungers,
cures for disease, promises that death is not the end. It reassures
us of our cosmic centrality and importance. It vouchsafes that we
are hooked up with, tied to, the Universe.* Sometimes it's a kind
of halfway house between old religion and new science, mistrusted
by both.

At the heart of some pseudoscience (and some religion also,
New Age and Old) is the idea that wishing makes it so. How
satisfying it would be, as in folklore and children's stories, to fulfil
our heart's desire just by wishing. How seductive this notion is,
especially when compared with the hard work and good luck
usually required to achieve our hopes. The enchanted fish or the
genie from the lamp will grant us three wishes - anything we want
except more wishes. Who has not pondered - just to be on the safe
side, just in case we ever come upon and accidentally rub an old,
squat brass oil lamp - what to ask for?

I remember, from childhood comic strips and books, a top-
hatted, moustachioed magician who brandished an ebony walking
stick. His name was Zatara. He could make anything happen,
anything at all. How did he do it? Easy. He uttered his commands
backwards. So if he wanted a million dollars, he would say 'srallod
noillim a em evig'. That's all there was to it. It was something like
prayer, but much surer of results.

I spent a lot of time at age eight experimenting in this vein,

* Although it's hard for me to see a more profound cosmic connection than the
astonishing findings of modern nuclear astrophysics: except for hydrogen, all
the atoms that make each of us up - the iron in our blood, the calcium in our
bones, the carbon in our brains - were manufactured in red giant stars
thousands of light years away in space and billions of years ago in time. We are,
as I like to say, starstuff.



18



The Most Precious Thing



commanding stones to levitate: 'esir, enots.' It never worked. I
blamed my pronunciation.

Pseudoscience is embraced, it might be argued, in exact propor-
tion as real science is misunderstood - except that the language
breaks down here. If you've never heard of science (to say nothing
of how it works), you can hardly be aware you're embracing
pseudoscience. You're simply thinking in one of the ways that
humans always have. Religions are often the state-protected
nurseries of pseudoscience, although there's no reason why reli-
gions have to play that role. In a way, it's an artefact from times
long gone. In some countries nearly everyone believes in astrology
and precognition, including government leaders. But this is not
simply drummed into them by religion; it is drawn out of the
enveloping culture in which everyone is comfortable with these
practices, and affirming testimonials are everywhere.

Most of the case histories I will relate in this book are
American - because these are the cases I know best, not
because pseudoscience and mysticism are more prominent in
the United States than elsewhere. But the psychic spoonbender
and extraterrestrial channeller Uri Geller hails from Israel. As
tensions rise between Algerian secularists and Muslim funda-
mentalists, more and more people are discreetly consulting the
country's 10,000 soothsayers and clairvoyants (about half of
whom operate with a licence from the government). High
French officials, including a former President of France,
arranged for millions of dollars to be invested in a scam (the
Elf-Aquitaine scandal) to find new petroleum reserves from
the air. In Germany, there is concern about carcinogenic 'Earth
rays' undetectable by science; they can be sensed only by
experienced dowsers brandishing forked sticks. 'Psychic sur-
gery' flourishes in the Philippines. Ghosts are something of a
national obsession in Britain. Since World War Two, Japan has
spawned enormous numbers of new religions featuring the
supernatural. An estimated 100,000 fortune-tellers flourish in
Japan; the clientele are mainly young women. Aum Shinrikyo,
a sect thought to be involved in the release of the nerve gas
sarin in the Tokyo subway system in March 1995, features
